
=== Data Schema

The OSM data model is a single "layer" that contains three elementary data types
and arbitrary attribute tags. This provides great flexibility to the format, and
topology is inherent in the format, but type checking relies on the user.

Besides the OSM data, all of the data sets provided for conflation were provided
as tabular GIS files such as Shapefile or File Geodatabase. These tabular
formats provide each layer (e.g., road, river, building) as a different file or
table. The available attributes are predefined as columns in the layer, and
strong type checking is enforced. The rigidity of the format can provide
benefits during type checking, but given the broad array of layer types we would
like to handle within Hootenanny, it becomes a hindrance to predefine all
possible layers and attributes. Also, maintaining topology within these tabular
formats can be quite complex. To avoid these issues, we convert all tabular data
into the OSM data model and format.

The following section discusses the internals of the OSM Data Model and schema
in more detail.

==== The OSM Data Model

The OSM data model is composed of three different elements. Each element may contain an arbitrary list of attributes called tags:

* Node – Similar to a point, a node contains a location (latitude, longitude)
  and a set of tags.
* Way – Similar to a line or polygon, a way is an ordered collection of nodes
  and a set of tags. The way indirectly contains location via the nodes
  constitute it.
* Relation – A relation is a group of nodes, ways, or relations and a set of
  tags. This construct can be used to create complex geometries (e.g.,
  multi-polygons or polygons with holes) or simply group and tag similar
  elements such as all the buildings that make up a shopping center.

[[IntersectAurora]]
.Intersection in Aurora, Colorado

image::images/image019.png[]

The example in <<IntersectAurora>> shows a road found in Aurora, CO. The tags
for the way are:

* `highway=residential`
* `surface=asphalt`
* `name=East Roxbury Place`

These tags show that the road is residential, paved with asphalt, and named
"East Roxbury Place." By default the way is not one way (Key:oneway -
OpenStreetMap Wiki, 2012). In the case of the roads just northeast, the
`oneway=yes` tag is specified to state explicitly that those roads are one way.

The highlighted red node is part of the labeled way and specifies `highway=stop`
. When this tag is applied to a node, it designates that there is a stop sign at
that location in the way. In contrast, the relationship between the stop sign
and road can be encoded within a tabular data model though it is less natural
due to joining of layers into a topology.

While tags can be arbitrary, there is a standard schema that is defined by the
OSM community. We take advantage of this standard during conflation when
matching and merging features. For example, if the name and road surface type
matches, there is a higher probability that the features are the same. Tag
matching is addressed in more detail in <<ExplManipulationsMergeWays>>.

